# Alternative Service Bus Management Clients
Service Bus Explorer is only on of the management clients available for Azure Service Bus.

Here are a couple of alternatives:

- **Microsoft Azure Management Portal**
- **ServiceBus360**

## Microsoft Azure Management Portal
In order to use the Brokered and Relay messaging functionality provided by the Service Bus, the first operation to perform is to provision a new Service Bus namespace or modify an existing namespace to include the Service Bus. You can accomplish this task from the Windows Azure Management Portal.

Once completed this step, you can start creating and using queues, topics and subscriptions. You have many options to provision and manage messaging entities:

- This first option is to exploit the [CreateQueue](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh293157.aspx), [CreateTopic](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh330826.aspx) and [CreateSubscription](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh330855.aspx) methods exposed by the [NamespaceManager](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/microsoft.servicebus.namespacemanager.aspx) class that can be used to manage entities, such as queues, topics, subscriptions, and rules, in your service namespace. This is exactly the approach that I followed to build the provisioning functionality exposed by the Service Bus Explorer  tool.
- The second approach is to rely on the [Service Bus REST API](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh367521.aspx) to create and delete messaging entities. By using REST, you can write applications in any language that supports HTTP requests, without the need for a client SDK. In particular, this allows applications based on non-Microsoft technologies  (e.g. Java, Ruby, etc.) not only to send and receive messages from the Service Bus, but also to create or delete queues, topics and subscription in a given namespace.
- Finally, you can administer messaging entities from the user interface supplied by the Windows Azure Management Portal. In particular, the buttons in the **Manage Entities** command bar highlighted in red at point 1 in the figure below allow creating a new queue, topic and subscription entity. Then you can use the navigation tree-view shown at point 2 to select an existing entity and display its  properties in the vertical bar highlighted at point 3. To remove the selected entity, you press the **Delete** button in the **Manage Entities** command bar.

Using Windows Azure Management Portal is a handy and convenient manner to handle the messaging entities in a given Service Bus namespace. However, at least at the moment, the set of operations that a  developer or a system administrator can perform using its user interface is quite limited. For example, the Windows Azure Management Portal actually allows a user to create queues, topics, and subscriptions and define their properties, but not to create or display rules for an existing subscription. At the moment,  you can accomplish this task only by using the [.NET Messaging API](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/microsoft.servicebus.messaging.aspx). In particular, to add a new rule to an existing subscription you can use the [AddRule(String, Filter)](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh429499.aspx) or the [AddRule(RuleDescription)](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh330813.aspx) methods exposed by the [SubscriptionClient](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/microsoft.servicebus.messaging.subscriptionclient.aspx) class, while to enumerate the rules of an existing subscription, you can use the [GetRules](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/microsoft.servicebus.namespacemanager.getrules.aspx) method of the [NamespaceManager](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/microsoft.servicebus.namespacemanager.aspx) class. Besides, the Windows Azure Management Portal actually does not provide the ability to perform the following operations:

- Properly visualize entities in a hierarchical manner. Actually, the Windows Azure Management Portal displays queues, topics and subscriptions with a flat treeview. However, you can organize messaging entities in a hierarchical structure simply by specifying their name as an absolute path composed of multiple path segments,  for example crm/prod/queues/orderqueue.
- Export the messaging entities contained in a given Service Bus namespace to an XML binding file (a-la BizTalk Server). Instead, the Service Bus Explorer tool provides the ability to select and export 
	- Individual entities.
	- Entities by type (queues or topics).
	- Entities contained in a certain path (e.g. crm/prod/queues).
	- All the entities in a given namespace.
- Import queues, topics and subscriptions from an XML file to an existing namespace. The Service Bus Explorer supports the ability to export entities to an XML file and reimport them on the same or another Service Bus namespace. This feature comes in a handy  to perform a backup and restore of a namespace or simply to transfer queues and topics from a testing to a production namespace.

That's why in June, I created a tool called [Service Bus Explorer](http://windowsazurecat.com/2011/07/exploring-topics-and-queues-by-building-a-service-bus-explorer-toolpart-1/) that allows a user to create, delete and test queues, topics, subscriptions, and rules. My tool was able to manage entities in the Labs Beta environment. However, the new version of the [Service Bus API](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/hh394905.aspx) introduced some breaking changes, as you can read [here](http://rickgaribay.net/archive/2011/09/14/azure-appfabric-service-bus-brokered-messaging-ga-amp-rude-ctp.aspx), so I built a new version of the Service Bus Explorer tool that introduces a significant amount of new features.

## ServiceBus360
If you are looking for a fully supported commercial product for better management and monitoring of Azure Service Bus, take a look at [ServiceBus360](https://servicebus360.com). ServiceBus360 is from one of the Microsoft Gold Partners.